Let's now consider a slightly more complex
example; this is a three link planar robot.
As you will remember from the lecture about
forward kinematics, a robot with three joints
or three degrees of freedom, allows us to
control the end effector pose, not just its
position, it's X and it's Y, but also the
orientation of the end effector.
We're going to label the link lengths of this
robot and we're going to indicate the joint
angles, Q1, Q2, and Q3. We're going to indicate
the end effector pose which comprises an X
and a Y component and an orientation theta.
We've previously described how to write down
an expression for the pose of the end effector
in terms of two dimensional homogeneous transformations
and it is a chain of transformations, rotation
about Q1, translation along the link by an
amount A1, rotation about Q2, translation
along the second link by a distance to A2,
rotation by join angle three and then a translation
along link three by the distance A3. It's
a little bit tedious but relatively straightforward
to multiply all of the matrices together and
I end up with a homogeneous transformation
matrix, which represents the pose of the robot
end effector and this is a three by three, homogeneous transformation matrix, in two dimensions.
You will recall that there are some parts
of the matrix which represent the translational
component of the pose and there are other
parts of the matrix which represent the rotational
part of the pose. Let's look first at the
translational part that is these are two elements
in the matrix up here and I can pull those
out and they represent the X and Y co-ordinate
of the end effector pose.
It's relatively simple to compute the derivate
of these with respect to time and as we did
earlier, I can write this in matrix form,
so we have an expression for X dot and Y dot,
in terms of a Jacobian Matrix and this time
our Jacobian Matrix has got two rows and three
columns and that is multiplied by a vector
of joint angle velocities, Q1 dot, Q2 dot
and Q3 dot. This is pretty straightforward.
Let's look now at the rotational part and
I'm going to pull that out. This is the rotational
part of our pose, describes the orientation
of the robot end effector.
We learnt very early on that the general form
for a rotation matrix in two dimensions looks
like this. By equating the arguments of the
cos sign and sin functions here, it's pretty
clear that we can write this for theta is
equal to Q1 plus Q2 plus Q3.
If you think about the geometry of the problem
then this result is actually not particularly
surprising. Now I can take the derivative
of theta with respect to time, so Q dot is
equal to Q1 dot, plus Q2 dot, plus Q3 dot and once again I can factorize this and write it in matrix form.
Here is the expression for X dot and Y dot
and here is the expression for theta dot.
Now both of them are a matrix multiplied by
a vector of joint angle velocities. I can
combine these together basically I stack two
matrices and I end up with a Jacobian Matrix
which is three by three. Here I have the joint
velocity and over here I have the spatial
velocity of the robot end effector, but once
again a linear relationship between joint
velocity and spatial velocity of the end effector.
So for this three link, planar manipulator
with joint angles Q1, Q2 and Q3, I can define
and end effector velocity in terms of its
translational velocity, that's it's X dot
and Y dot component and also in terms of its
rotational velocity; theta dot. So if I specify
that, that’s what I want in my particular
robot control problem, then computing the
Jacobian and taking its inverse, I can compute
the velocity of the joint angles that I need
in order to achieve that end effector velocity.